Why Store Data on the Client?
The main reason is practicality. JavaScript code running on the browser does not necessarily need to send all information to the server. There are several use cases:

1. You want to increase performance. You can cache data client-side so it can be retrieved without additional server requests.
2. You have a significant quantity of client-side-only data, e.g. HTML strings or widget configuration settings.
3. You want you make your application work off-line.

Storage Options:

A) JavaScript Variables [Past, Present and Future]

Advantages:
1. fastest and simplest solution
2. no need to serialize or deserialize data
3. ideal for SPAs

Disadvantages:
1. very fragile - linking elsewhere, refreshing or closing the tab will wipe all the data
2. global variables can be overwritten and analyzed by 3rd party scripts

B) Cookies [Past, Present and Future]: are domain-specific chunks of text data. They sound tasty, but cookie handling is awkward in JavaScript since the basic document.cookie string must be parsed

Advantages:
1. a reliable method of retaining state between the client and server
2. by setting an expirty date, cookie data will persist beyond page refreshes and tab closing
3. cookies are supported in all modern browsers

Disadvantages:
1. clunky js implementation - cookie handling library is required
2. values are strings only; other data must be serialized using methods such as JSON.stringify and JSON.parse
3. storage space is limited - do not depend on having more than 20 cookies of 4KB each
4. can be deleted or blocked
5. unfairly labeled as thread to internet privacy; need to comply with regional rules and regulations [http://www.sitepoint.com/europe-website-cookie-privacy-law/]

The flip-side of cookie client/server sharing causes the biggest technical issue. Cookie data is sent in the HTTP header of every request and response. It’s therefore appended to every HTML page, image, CSS file, JavaScript file, Ajax call, etc. If you had 50Kb of cookie data and downloaded ten 1KB images, it would result in one megabyte of additional network traffic.

C) window.name [Past, Present]: can be used to set a single string value which persists between browser refreshes or linking elsewhere and clicking back

Advantages:
1. simple to use
2. data is retained on the client only and never sent to the server
3. the property permits several megabytes of information
4. wide browser support

Disadvantages:
1. data is lost when the tab or browser is closed
2. only a single string value can be stored — serialization will be necessary
3. pages in other domains can read or change window.name data

window.name was never designed for data storage. It’s a hack and vendors could drop support at any time. For that reason, it’s best to use alternative storage options although the technique has been adopted within legacy browser shims and polyfills.


D) HTML5 Web SQL Database [Past]: The Web SQL Database was an initial attempt by vendors to bring SQL-based relational databases to the browser. It has been implemented in Chrome, Safari and Opera 15+, but was opposed by Mozilla and Microsoft in favor of IndexedDB.

Advantages:
1. designed for robust client-side data storage and access
2. it uses SQL like many server side applications
3. some support on Webkit/Blink desktop and mobile browsers

Disadvantages:
1. SQL never seemed appropriate for client-side development
2. the database schema must be defined up-front
3. marginal browser support and the Webkit/Blink teams may eventually drop it
4. the W3C specification was abandoned in 2010

In summary: don’t use a Web SQL Database!

E) HTML5 Web Storage [Present, Future]: WebStorage provides two objects with the identical APIs:
window.localStorage - retain persistent data
code.sessionStorage - to retain session-only data which is lost when tab is closed
Domain-specific strings are stored using name/value pairs. Unlike cookies, the storage limit is far larger (at least 5MB) and information is never transferred to the server.

Advantages:
1. easy to use with simple name/value pairs
2. session and persistent storage options are available
3. an event model is available to keep other tabs and windows synchronized
4. wide support on desktop and mobile browsers including IE8+
5. Web Storage polyfills are available for older browsers which fall-back to cookie and window.name storage methods

Disadvantages:
1. string values only - serialization may be necessary
2. unstructured data with no transactions, indexing or searching facilities
3. may exhibit poor performance on large datasets


F) HTML5 IndexedDB [Future]: IndexedDB provides a structured, transactional, high-performance NoSQL-like data store with a synchronous and asynchronous API. There’s too much to document here, but the API permits you to create databases, data stores and indexes, handle revisions, populate data using transactions, run non-blocking queries, and traverse data sets using cursors.

Advantages:
1. designed for robust client-side data storage and access
2. good support in modern desktop browsers: IE10+, Firefox 23+, Chrome 28+ and Opera 16+

Disadvantages:
1. the API is very new and subject to revision
2. little support in older and mobile browsers
3. a large and complex API — it would be difficult and largely impractical to create a IndexedDB polyfill
4. like any NoSQL store, data is unstructured which can lead to integrity issues



References: https://www.sitepoint.com/html5-browser-storage-past-present-future/
Other References:
1. http://dev.w3.org/html5/webstorage/
2. http://www.sitepoint.com/an-overview-of-the-web-storage-api/
3. https://github.com/Modernizr/Modernizr/wiki/HTML5-Cross-Browser-Polyfills#web-storage-localstorage-and-sessionstorage
4. http://docs.webplatform.org/wiki/apis/indexedDB

G) HTML5 File API [Future]: The HTML5 File API is being extended to support writing as well as reading sequential data on the local file system. Your domain is provided with a complete sand-boxed hierarchical file system to use as it chooses.

Advantages:
1. large text and binary files can be created and stored
2. performance should be good

Disadvantages:
1. a very early specification which is subject to revision
2. an obvious security risk unless file writing is restricted
3. little support in current browsers and polyfills may be impractical
4. unstructured data with no transactions, indexing or searching facilties

